the session is being recorded.
Thank you, Aria, for that. OK so.
Uh, today we are going to.
You know with the sequential logic.
So basically we said that we have
combination logic and sequential logic.
A sequential logic are those
that have feedback and for those.
Type of circuit.
We have to be careful about
time steps or the sequence of.
I mean in putting the outputs to the circuit.
That's why we call it sequential.
So we have to be careful about
the time steps and based on that.
Or as we can see what is going
to be the output.
Based on the previous input,
so I put another poster for another
movie which is called Run Lola Run.
Anybody of you have seen this movie?
Again, this movie is among the I
mean in the history of cinema.
It's a movie which is in the
non-linear narration of the story.
And one of the greatest movie for
the for those that are interested
in movies in terms of I mean
formal definition of the movie.
And I mean the genre of no formalism.
So in the movie there are different.
Type of cinematography and but one
of the underlying theme of the
movie is playing with the time.
What happens if you can travel within
the time or you have a chance to start
your I mean your life again or you're
dead again from the very beginning.
So I highly suggest you to watch this movie.
It may not have an interesting story,
very similar to the mental movie,
but still it's worth watching this
movie in terms of cinematography and
the underlying theme about time so.
And I hope that these movies
actually motivate you about this
sequential logic in digital design.
So that was the basic block diagram.
A block diagram of a sequential logic
as we already showed showed that.
So and then we could build the most
simplest sequential logic that is able to
restore the previous state of the circuit.
So we call it Rs sequential
logic because of the inputs.
Enables us to reset the circuit,
meaning that we bring the status 20 or sat.
We bring this status to one or
we can neither research nor sad,
meaning that we just want to
restore previous state so R0S0.
We keep the previous state for the next
time step and we said that the main
output is the first output which we said F1.
So we consider fun as the main output of
the circuit and we call it Q or their
status and based on the design of the
Rs the next output F2 is always F1.
Followed by the not so F1 bar is equal to F1.
As a result,
the second output is the color cube
are so 00 stores the previous state
an in the second output Q bar.
01 or is 1 reset,
so the main output is zero and the second
app is the not off the first output.
110 sets meaning that it brings
the circuit to the state one.
And the second output is the
nut of the first output zero,
and the only condition which do which we do
not like it or it doesn't have any meaning,
meaning that.
I mean we want to both reset or set.
It doesn't have any meaning,
so we call it don't care conditions.
So this is not a valid.
This is not a valid input for this circuit.
So we said that this is the most.
Simplest sequential logic that is
able to store one only one bit,
either zero or one.
Now we want to extend this circuit
to have more capability we want to.
I mean address some of the issues of the
circuit and then are based on complete.
Sequential logic that is able to stores
around one week and build larger units.
So.
This is called a timing diagram or
a sequence timing sequence diagram,
which basically shows the behavior of a
sequential logic within the time steps.
So assuming that we have only this unit
or as unit that is able to store 0 and one,
we want to see what happens if
we change the inputs RMS.
So we said that initially in positive
logic we assume that the the initial
status of the sequential logic is.
Zero and then it starts.
So if both are so at this step,
at time zero,
we assume that the internal state is 0.
And then after that time step or
an S becomes one. So both are one.
It brings this status to
the don't care condition.
And then our drops added at this
point are drops. An S is still one,
so it becomes 01 which is set.
So it makes the status set.
And then at this moment.
S drops to 0, so both Rs is 00,
so as long as they are both 0
distance gonna be preserved.
The previous that the previous state
is 1 so it keeps track up until
here one so it keeps the value
of 1 in these sequential logic.
And then at this point, or goes to one.
An S is still is 0,
so our becomes one as is 0,
so it is reset action.
So it brings the circuit to
0 so one drops to 0.
And then ask goes to one, both or one.
Up until this moment.
One one in the input of brings this
status tool don't care condition,
so we don't look at the outputs and etc.
So one of the.
Property that you can see by this
timing diagram is that whenever
you change the order and S,
you change the internal status
of the circuit.
So this is a kind of OK,
because the way we design the second
was based on the inputs of RMS.
But The thing is,
we have to be careful about when
we change the order and ask.
So if at some point some noise
happened or at some point we suddenly
change the one of the inputs or S,
it immediately changes the
internal state of the circuit.
So in another word or an S,
the inputs control how the state changes.
Also, whenever they change,
they suddenly change the
internal status of the circuit.
But if you want to improve it,
if you want to split how
from when, for instance,
if you want to bring the 2nd 20,
but we want to do that at the settlement.
I mean moment in that I'm not at
as long as we change the RMS so we
want to split between how and when.
So the idea is that let's put a
gate or latch so latch or gate
is just a mean lock on the door.
So the idea is that let's put it
door in this sequential logic.
And then whenever we want to change
the circuit, the status of the circuit.
So we open the door and we look at the R&S.
Otherwise whatever the value
of R&S behind the door is,
we don't look at them.
So it's kind of a two step change
to the circuit. First of all,
we open the door of this or we open the gate.
Or we open the latch.
And then we look at the value of R&S
and based on those values we change
the internal state of the circuit.
Otherwise we assume that this
circuit is off or the door is closed
and whatever the value of R&S are,
we don't look at that.
We don't care about the value of otherness.
This way we can, we can speak.
Or we can put two phases changing
the order Ness and opening the
door to apply the change.
As long as the door is closed,
we don't look at the value of R&S
or any change to the ordinance.
So it's kind of synchronizing
the change of circuit based on
whenever the door is open.
So again, based on this diagram,
whenever they are in as changes,
it changes the circuit status,
but we want to avoid that.
You want to say that OK,
whenever you would change or unless
you have to wait up until we
open the door or we open the gate
and then we change this status.
So we want to expand the organ
S unit to have a gate or latch.
So do you have any idea about fixing aranas?
How can I?
How can I add a gate or door to this unit?
So basically the idea is that
I want to add a door,
for instance this is a door.
Tour of the house.
And I changed status inside the
Rs whenever this store is open.
Otherwise, we keep previous status.
So do you have any idea about?
One hot vector, so one hot vector.
What do you mean?
I mean, one hot vector is,
for instance, we have a vector of.
For instance, and values all are zero and
then one of them is 1 and all are zero.
Oh, you mean in terms of selecting
the out one of the locations?
So here are we already dealing with this
unit, so this unit is already selected.
So you say that we can use the decoder
in order to select it at that location.
We say that it's already selected,
but we have to open the door for that.
It's kind of a maintaining the very similar
way we turn on or turn off the decoders.
You remember when we said that we
want to turn off the decoder and as
a result always the output of zero
whenever we want to turn on the decoder.
We turn it on and then it looks.
Exactly kind of adding it.
Enable input to the circuit,
but this time when it is not enabled
it is towards the previous status.
It's not off,
it's a store in the previous status.
However, when the Enable is on,
meaning that it's open,
it can accept the the inputs.
So The thing is, this is the idea.
We call it S all that or Rs lad,
meaning that we have an error or
S with a latch or with a gate.
Sometimes we call it gated Sr.
Latches or latch or gated.
It's and the idea is this very simple.
Basically, we said that.
If I add two ants.
And as long as.
This is the enable input.
As long as the enable input is 0.
The output at this end is 0.
As a result, or an as is always zero,
an it keeps the previous status.
So as long as enable is 0.
For the output or an S,
it doesn't have any effect because the
output or an S goes with this and and as
a result the internal R&S is always 0.
When the internal R&S is always zero,
it means that it keeps whatever
is that previous status was.
And it doesn't accept any
change to R&S if S becomes one,
an R becomes 0, which is the set.
Because this ends have zero in the
one of the outputs it out this year.
So as long as EO,
the output or an S doesn't have any impact,
so it stores.
However, whenever the Enable is 1.
The output R&S is directly
connected to internal or an S. So.
If enable is 1, this input is 1.
This input is 1, so as goes directly.
To this, as the output S goes
to internal S and also this one.
The output R is connected to input R.
So this now are the output,
or an S acts very similar
to the internal organ as.
So if RMS is 00 stores.
01 resets 10 sets an 11 doesn't is
a don't care or forbidden action.
So by just adding two ants
before the internal organ as and
and then with an enable input,
we can build a gate.
We can build a enable input
as long as enable is 0,
the internal circuit doesn't
look at the R&S it keeps storing.
However, if enable is one that starts
working within normal or an S unit.
So if you put it in the timing
diagram so we call it.
An as large or gated or an S.
And in the block diagram,
we just add another input E and we
should like this or an SEQ&Q bar.
So let's see the effect in the timing step.
And in within the time or in
the timing diagram?
So you see here the enable
inputs another input,
which basically it's the signal that allows
the Rs unit to open or close the door.
So for instance at these moments.
That he is 1.
These are the moments that the
door is open for the 2nd and it
accepts the change from Ordonez.
However, at these moments.
He is zero.
Enable is zero, meaning that whatever
the change to the other nurse,
the door is closed so we don't
accept any input.
From the R&S.
So we store whatever we had already.
So let's see what happens.
So initially, as we said,
we assume that the internal state is 0.
Now let's go to the within
the time enable input is 0,
so whatever the value of
R&S doesn't have any impact.
So RN S both or one.
So we don't care because the door is
closed and we can assume that this is 1.
Or sometimes we can say that
whatever the previous values was,
so we don't care and we keep it.
So either 0.
Or we don't care previous values.
The Enable is 0.
But now at this moment at this moment.
Enable becomes one.
Now we open the door and we see
what is the R and S
R is zero as is 1 within
the time that the door is open.
So as long as the door is open
we accept the change form Rs.
And now when the artist 0 S is 1,
it is the set action,
so it becomes a it brings
the 2nd to the state one.
However, at this moment the Enable is 0.
Meaning that we closed the door.
It closed the door up until this moment,
so whatever changed to R&S,
for instance, this change to organize
or becomes from zero goes to one.
Or this change as from one drops to zero.
We don't care because the door is closed,
so we just store previous status so.
At all these moments that the door is closed,
whatever changes to R&S
doesn't have any impact.
We just restore previous value,
which was one.
So we keep storing that.
So in order to understand this,
you can think of living inside the R&S unit.
So you open the door, see the RN S as
long as you close the door, you don't
care about the change the ordinance.
So let's see what happens in the next state.
So at this moment now the Enable is 1.
So we open the door. Odd is 1.
An S is. Zero, what happens? Anybody?
Correct, this is the recent action,
so it brings the status to 0.
As long as the door is open,
we see the otherness and
it brings the status to 0.
So now we at this moment at this time
up until this time that the Enable
is one we accept the challenge,
but at this time enable goes to zero.
We mean that we closed the door.
We closed the gate or we closed
the glach what happens next?
So at this moment,
whatever changed to the R&S,
we don't care because
we the door is closed.
So we store whatever we had,
so we had zero.
We continue storing the zero.
Reset correct, yeah?
So as long as the door is closed,
we keep whatever we had. We had zero.
We continue to have it still at this moment.
Now the Enable becomes one.
Now we can accept the change,
so our up until this moment is 0.
S is 0, so up until this moment we have 00.
This is the store action.
So we keep. 0.
Up until here, but at this moment the.
Or becomes one and S becomes 0.
10 which is reset.
So reset means that whatever we had,
we bring it to 0, so we continue.
So basically you can see that at this
moment or are changes from zero to one,
we accept this change, but because it
is 0 after resetting the zero is 0,
so we continue keeping zero in this state.
So one of the important thing here
is that as long as the E is 1.
Whatever changes to ordinace
changes the status of the circuit.
So here we had two steps storing resetting.
So you can continue with this
timing up until the last time
interval and see what's going on.
But the important effect
that you see is that.
All the changes to the circuit
synchronized with work.
Whenever the E is 1.
With these moments.
So it's kind of a command to the flip flop.
We command the flip flop
or sorry the Rs unit.
We command the Rs unit that you
only change your state if I let it.
I I ask you to open the door so this
enable signal comes from something called.
For instance you can say God or Oracle
or is central unit or a command unit.
This command unit.
Send this enable signal to the flip flop to
the Rs unit and it says that open the door.
Close the door, open the door,
close the door and basically it says
that this is the moment that you have
to open the door and change your step.
Otherwise you have to close the door.
So we call this unit that has,
I mean separate the how and when.
Called, I mean Sr Latch or Rs latch because
it has a gate before the input or an S.
One thing I have to mention is that
there are a lot of ways to build the Rs
unit and also Rs unit with the latch.
This is the most simplest one
that we introduced this one.
So this is the most simplest
one that we introduced.
But if you look it up in the
Internet or Wikipedia page,
there are different ways to build
the order and S with the latch.
Or even inside the organelles you can use
different gates besides the NOR gates.
Uh, but, uh, I just wanted to show that
design with mean and for an S latch,
which is in the book.
So this is the design bar by
NAND Gate instead of NOR gate.
So if you remember we design our.
Or a nurse.
Unit with the Norgate.
This is our design with the Norgate.
This was the art.
This was the *** and this was the QQ bar.
And now that we add the ADD gate,
so we have enabled here.
So we basically do an ad here.
Also, we do another and here,
so this is the OR an S with the gate,
but within within NAND
Gate this is the design.
And the advantage of this net design is
that all the gates are Nan, so this is not.
This is not. This is not.
This is not, but for our design
we have two noran too and kids.
So this is the advantage of this new design.
But be careful that in our design or.
ES connected to Q.
An S is connected to Q bar,
but within and design.
S is connected to Q&R is connected to Cuba.
But what this is the design?
I mean change,
but The thing is that as you can see here.
This table that shows how the changes
to the input changes the estate
of the circuit is always the same,
so as long as zero enable is 0,
whatever the value of R&S,
no change used or whatever you have.
If enable is 100, no change.
01 reset, 10 set and 11.
Don't care or entertainment
or forbidden action,
so any different design of or an S unit
web based on whatever get you design it.
It should have this standard table.
So if you go whatever part of the world.
If you say that I have the Rs unit
and I don't look at the design
internally that design or that
unit should have this table should
have should function like this.
00 stores, 01 reset,
10 set and 11 indeterminate.
As long as enable is 1,
if enable zero don't change.
So this is the standard for any Rs latch.
And this is the recap so.
This is the block diagram
whatever inside this unit is,
it should look like this
R as with enabled QQ bar.
And this table, which is the truth
table about the sequential circuit,
but one of the difference of the
truth table and this table is
that it shows that I'm a step.
That's why we call it characteristic
table which basically shows how this
sequential logic works based on the input.
So whatever design you come up
with for the Rs sequential logic,
it should have this.
A truth table or characteristic table,
and this is the state transition diagram
which shows the life cycle of the circuit.
If it is zero and you make the reset action.
Sorry if you are at one and do reset action.
You go to the zero if you are at zero
and you do set action, you go to one.
If you had one and do a store or set,
you stay at one.
If you are at zero and you restore or reset,
you stay at 0. However, if you are
at zero and you do forbidden action,
you go to don't care condition from the
don't care condition by reset you go
back to zero by set you go back to one.
So you see this diagram shows the life
cycle based on whatever value of Sr is
and what is the internal instead of 2nd.
And again, this is happening whenever E is 1.
If he is enabled, is zero, you always
stay at the estate that you had.
That's why we usually don't show the
enable input in the characters table.
In the transition diagram
state transition diagram.
Any questions so far?
So no questions, so I'm going to.
A thought. Building other type of latches.
So before that I have to make sure
that everybody has the full attention.
So I'm waiting for your feedback.
So send me some feedback such as this.
I mean this happy or surprise so I can make
sure that you have the oh nice. Great.
Great. Nick is not happy.
OK, so let's move on.
So let's build other latches.
By other latches, we mean that.
Is it able to build other
sequential logic that have different
behaviors than the ordinace?
And the answer is yes.
For an S we have a free actions store,
reset sets and forbidden action
that we don't usually use that for.
We don't use the forbidden action.
But now we want to build other
latches that have different behaviors.
Once they have only set and reset,
they don't have a store or they
only have a store and it doesn't
have a for instance other.
I mean they don't have a store
or set and they don't have reset.
Something like that,
so choosing within different behaviors
and building different sequential logics.
So the first one is that.
Is it possible to have a latch that
doesn't have the forbidden action?
So basically we want to get rid of
that forbidden action in order and
as you said that if both or one it
goes it brings this status of the order.
Nesta don't care condition
and we don't like it.
So one easy way to do that is that
we make a circuit that always R&S
are complements of each other.
So basically never or is 1 S is
0 or whenever S is one or is 0.
This way we avoid the time the.
Oldest status that ordinace or
both one and brings the sequential
circuit to don't care condition.
So in order to do that,
we already know how to do.
We can simply make a NOT gate between Rs.
So basically we create one wire.
This wire directly goes to S but
do not have this wire goes to R.
So this way always RSR complemented
each other.
So what happens is this.
So as long as enable is 0.
Enable is zero. We said that the
auto nest change to the R&S latch
doesn't have an impact in stores,
so whatever the value of R&S is. Via store.
So this value of X other zeron
one doesn't matter, however.
If the Enable is one,
we say that we accept the
change from R&S, but what are?
They are an S or an S are
based on X if X is 0. X is 0,
S becomes zero and the nut of X goes.
Here are becomes one which is the reset.
Reset means that bring the status to 0.
However. If X is 1.
S becomes one, Anar becomes zero,
which brings the status to
set the state or set action,
brings the status to one.
So this status that. Both are as becomes.
One never happens because as you can see,
X can only have zero and one values, so
this way we avoid this stone care condition.
But The thing is that we either set or
reset or we store as long as he is 0.
So we have the same actions as
the order and S with latch,
so we can store as long as E 0.
We can set when E is 1 and then X is one.
We can reset whenever is 1 and.
Whenever is 1 and X is 0.
So this is a nice latch, basically.
If I change,
the X200 goes directly to this
status to the inside the circuit.
If enable is 1.
If X is 11, directly goes to one to
the internal status. If he is 1.
So you see that whenever
is the input goes inside.
If X is, 00, goes inside.
If X is, 11 goes inside.
As long as he is 1, if he is zero,
it is stores whatever it has.
This large called dilige.
So basically an Rs latch that the Rs
is always not of each other is called
the latch and it works like this.
So as long as he is 0 stores.
As long as E is 1,
it depends on the input if 0.
It brings this faster,
so if one it brings us to 1.
So we just change the X 2D.
This is called the latch.
And if we show the table without the
Enable because we we assume that E is 0,
stores is 1 sees the input.
Without the input of the most simplest
to stable for deal at D is 0.
'cause inside these one go inside.
If you want to store the
information you have to simply.
Make enable input zero in the stores.
It doesn't have any specific action for 0.
And he he it is the design,
so with the most simplest on S we had,
we add the latch. And then we make
ordinaires not of each other.
So all this part diagram is called the latch.
This is the block diagram.
Usually they show it by D and the
characteristic table is zero.
Goes inside, one goes inside,
so there is no action for store.
And this is the state transition diagram.
As long as he is enabled one.
If you're at zero and you input 0,
so zero goes on top of 0.
So you are still at 0.
However, if you change the data one
you transit to state one as long
as you are at one and you input 11
goes on top of 1 stores an if you
change the input to 01 changes to 0.
And this is the state transition down.
You see that at this transition
diagram there is no don't care
condition or forbidden condition.
All the stars are eligible.
The next large is called T
Lodge and what is the T Lodge?
T networks like this.
If the input is zero, it is stores.
If the input is 1, it complements.
So this is another type of latch
that has different behaviors,
so we want to have a sequential
logic that acts like this.
As long as the input to the lodge is zero,
we keep the store so it is very similar to
this store action of the order or an S latch,
but as long as T is one we want
to complement whatever we had,
so it's not restoring.
We do compliment if you already have one.
We want to make it 0.
If you already had zero,
we want to make it 1.
So later we'll see.
How can we design any sequential
logic based on the truth table?
But for now,
if I give you a D latch,
how can you change the D latch to
work like this characteristic table?
So think about that,
I mean one or two minutes.
Think about this.
How can we build a?
This type of behavior by.
The lodge so remember for the
D latch that was the. Behavior.
D and then the QD is zero.
Make it 0. These one make it 1.
So it is kind of similar to the D.
So basically we want to
whenever we needed new input T.
But this T if T is zero,
we want to a store.
So whatever we had,
we want to repeat that if you had zero,
we want to repeat 0.
If you have one,
we want to repeat one as long as T is 0.
However, if he becomes one.
And this is the wire 40.
If we had zero, we want to make it not.
And make it 1. Or if you had one,
we want to make it nuts and then make it 0.
On Nick has an idea.
Next says that if T is 0, so let's see.
So I mean for now we are
working with the guesswork,
so we are guessing what is the design.
But later we provide an algorithm.
If you follow that bottom step by step,
we can come up with the correct design.
But for now let's try some
different combinations.
Next says that if. T0 we can we have.
The here is the queue.
It means that the current status.
If T is zero, we can.
Whatever we had. We make it.
Inside So what did I have to put it here?
If I put and. So.
TO with anything we had so T0 with.
Zero with Q becomes 0,
so if whatever we had becomes 0,
but we want to if it is zero,
it goes 0, but if it is 1.
It goes zero as well, but we want to keep
it 1 so and is not the correct design.
How about or?
If you have T here 0.
And this is the cue from the previous status.
I bring it here and I or it with T.
So if the previous status is 00, goes here.
An T is 00 or zero becomes 0.
So we repeat 00 goes to 0.
So far so good. However,
if the previous status is 11, goes here.
One or zero becomes one.
And once goes inside,
so it seems it's working.
So if one goes to one, as long as T is 0.
So it's working, so let's check for the T1.
If she is 1. I want to compliment.
So I bring the Q here.
Or it? And then put it here.
So if the previous statuses 00 goes here and
then one comes here one and zero becomes.
One, one or zero 1 / 0 becomes one.
And one goes inside.
So if it is zero, it becomes one.
If T is 1. So it compliments.
How about the next combination?
So if T is 1?
And this is the previous status.
If the previous status is zero,
I bring it here or and then outside.
So if the previous service site is 1.
One goes here.
He is 1 one or one becomes one.
It goes one so one becomes one.
But we want to make it 0.
So or is worked as long as he was zero,
and as long as he was one and
the previous status was zero,
but it doesn't work whenever we
have one in the previous status.
So. What gate you already know that it acts?
Like itself for instance, or whatever value
you have if you use that gate with zero,
it doesn't have any impact,
but that kid with the one compliments.
So if you have a variable X.
That gate. With zero is equal to X.
That gate with one make it export.
Then I can change X with
the QQ that get zero.
Is QQD added one is Q bar.
What is the gate? Oh correct everyone.
yes exclusive or.
So this is the idea in the
output I have the Q&Q bar.
The only thing I have to decide is
that at what time I have to input it.
One of the way is exclusive,
or as you said.
Q goes here.
Q With one becomes Cuba.
As long as T is 1, it's not staying put.
However, if she is 0.
Q Comes here whatever exclusive or
with a 0 in itself. So Q goes to Q.
So with the exclusive or you can
store or not the previous status
and the previous status goes from
the output of the circuit itself.
There is another way to build the lodge.
This one. I had Q from previous status.
Also I have two bar from the previous status.
So I have two with two inputs.
I have to choose between one
of them to one single output.
What is the?
Circuit I have to put here to
choose between two of them.
Anybody?
You remember we said that whenever you
had multiple inputs and you have to.
Select one of them and then attach
that one to the single output.
What was the device?
Or what was the circuit
that we use to selecting?
From an input San attached
to one single output.
Decoder multiplexer
encoder or demultiplexers.
Exxon says multiplexers. He correct.
Remember the multiplexers
multiplexers was the device
that you have multiple inputs.
And you have to select one of them to
single output so you have only one
output and you have multiple inputs.
I zero, I one, etc.
You selected this on the switch inputs.
So now you have two inputs and
you have to select it in two and
attach it to one single output.
So between two inputs you have to
select one of them and attach it to one.
So you need it multiplexers 2 by 1.
For the multiple XS2Y1,
how many switch input you need?
Correct, yes, so basically you
can attach. A. Multiplexors.
2 by 1.
And the single switch input could be T.
If T is zero, it selects the first
input attached to the output,
which is Q stores. If T is 1,
it selects the second output,
which is Q bar and Q bar goes inside.
So this is another design for this latch.
So in general this is called T latch,
so you we can build the T latch by D latch.
So as long as T0 exclusive or with zero
is itself it is stores as long as T is 1.
Exclusive or with one compliments.
And here is the block diagram, so again.
Rs units with the latch and then the lodge.
And then T latch.
And here is the summary.
The block diagram is shown
with the tea with the latch.
The characteristic table 0 stores
one compliments, so there is no
set or reset action for this lat.
This large, only other keeps
whatever it had or compliment it
doesn't look at what is the values.
Are there zero or one
whatever it has compliments.
And this is the state diagram
or state transition diagram.
If you are at 0.
T is one compliment if you
have one and T is one compliment.
If you're at zero and TO your store
if you are at one and T0 your store.
And this is this summer.
OS on ask that why we need such a
large one of the immediate one is that
you remember for Two's complement.
For twist compliment,
you need one's complement.
Plus one, what is the one's complement?
Then not of the binary number.
So basically if you have
a binary number 01011.
In order to restore this number,
how many laps you need?
How many RSD or T last unit?
All these units can store only one bit,
so for each one you need one unit.
So you need five latches.
So imagine these are the latches.
Tixall RT latches.
So if you store the information in T Lodge.
And then you make T1 for all of them,
so you attach them to an input one.
All of them at this at
whenever the E is becomes one,
you compliment them 00101.
This is, this latch is very good
whenever you need that to do
complement of the binary number,
you install your binary number in
T latches and you just whenever
you need to compliment that,
you just make the T1 and
it compliments, yeah.
So based on the latches we
introduced so. Which one is the
best one for storing information?
So. Before I go to the next match.
So we had Rs latch.
We had TD latch. We had T latch.
So if I had a binary number,
for instance 1010,
I have the binder number.
This if I want to restore it,
which large do you select
within these three?
Anybody?
I want to restore it only.
First of all, how how many laps
we need? How many laps we meet?
Correct, for each piece we need one that so
I have to build one latch here one last year,
one last year and one latch here,
so four latches. So now I want to store them.
So if I select Sri have to control or an S,
for instance for this one I have to input.
I have to make a set action so
I have to for an SI have to.
As for this last, I have to make
it 0 so I have to make it 10.
Make 0. And then for the second one,
the ordinace must be 10.
Make it 1 for the third one.
I have to make the R&S.
UH-10 make it 0 and then for the last one
S must be one or must be zero to make it 1.
So you see if you select Sr latch you
have to come up with different values for
R&S in order to make them set or reset.
If you select D, what happens?
If you select the large so imagine
these are the latches.
Allardi
the only thing you have to do is that attach.
So these are the values 0101 you have to
simply attach the value to the input.
Whatever you have directly goes
inside the inside the latches.
So zero goes here. One goes here.
Zeros here one of those.
So the best large to restore
the information is the last,
because whatever the value
you have in the binary value,
you can attach that value to the D input.
It goes directly inside.
But whenever you need to komplement.
You it's better to have a T latch,
so you transfer this information to
T latch and then make a compliment.
So these are different behaviors
or different choices for latches.
But the last latch we introduced
is called J collage,
and this is the most compliment
complete large behalf.
This match is introduced by Jack Kilby.
Jack Kilby is actually the one
of if you ask me who.
Actually Mickey.
Huge contribution to today's computer
systems in terms of hardware,
not computation power in terms
of hardware is Jack Kilby.
That's why he won the Nobel Prize in 2000.
And the contribution is this.
The first I see.
That was built was based on his effort and
this is the physical picture of a latch.
That which we call it Jay College.
And now I'm going to explain what
is the so this physical
circuit you can see here is able
to store 0 and one so far you
didn't see the physical circuit
of Rs or D or T LG But this is the
physical Circuit of the J colleran.
I'm going to explain what the Jacob.
And after designing the jcole latch
which was able to store 0 and one,
he could build the 1st.
Calculators that was based
on the sequential logic.
These calculators are able to
store information and etc.
So you see the difference
between these two calculators.
The previous calculators only
could do the calculation based
on the combination of logic.
Whatever you input and you do the arithmetic,
it shows you in the display.
But the right side you can store
the information and you can
do some more calculation.
For instance,
you can say that X + Y and then store it
and then brings it to the power of Z an etc.
So.
Here's the difference between this Calculator
and this one based on the sequential logic.
And this is the scale of the flip flop.
So this just this size of a sequential
logic can install only zero and one.
And literally see that
how technology progress.
To make it smaller and smaller
so this unit can in this store.
Zero and one.
In terms of the size of the large,
if you or wonder what is the size?
And the S. The Jay College is
basically built upon the Sr latch.
And the idea is that.
We want to have 00 as a store
01 as the reset 10 as the set.
For the Forbidden Action 11,
we want to make it use of it.
If you want to come up
with a use for the 11,
what would be that action?
Anybody? So you have a store reset set.
So we have three actions.
But the last action would be what?
So based on that ilaj you
have a store and compliment,
so if you could build a large that
has all the available actions,
the store reset set and compliment
you have all the four possible
actions on top of the latches,
and that's the idea of the jaycar latch.
The Jacob matches that we had
a store we had reset and set.
Let's make use out of one on
one and make it compliment.
So basically now we have the
ability of the T latch in one large.
We can store, reset, set an compliment,
and that's the idea of the jakar.
How can we build that so you see,
we need a feedback from Q bar.
We need a feedback from Q.
And you have to come up
with a circuit here that.
Preserve the RN? S works like before,
but when the ordinace becomes one and one.
It does the compliment.
So basically it becomes if Q.
Is 0 the organ as the internal one
should becomes 01 make it reset
so zero goes to one an if Q is
one we want to make a compliment.
Bring it to 0 so as a result we want
to make it R1 and S0. We reset it.
But this option we want to do it
only at the time that the authors.
R&S becomes one.
Both becomes one. Otherwise,
we want to make it work like a normal aranas.
So as I said,
you have to try different designs,
but as I said later,
we provide an algorithm to design any
functionality based on the sequential logic.
So the idea is this, if you add two ants.
And the one of the input of
the ants comes from the.
Output of these Rs. So Q goes here.
And two bar comes here.
This circuit works as normal or an
S large plus if both becomes one,
it acts like compliment.
So let's see how can it work.
So if it's already 1.
What happens next?
If it's already 11 comes here.
One comes here also here it becomes
one followed by do not become zero.
Zero goals here.
This ad have a zero in the input,
so this internal S becomes 0.
The only thing matters is here for the R.
If R is 1. It becomes one and it does reset.
One goes to 0.
However,
if R is 00,
goes here and 00 stores.
So you see that if the previous status is 1.
The S as long as S is zero,
it depends on R. Or is zero istores?
Why is 1 reset so?
Because S is 0 or becomes one and resets?
If S is 1. Again, because the.
Previous statuses 10 goes here.
S doesn't have any impact because the
output of the 1st and is always here,
so the internal R&S is exactly
the same as previous one.
So store and reset.
So you can see that whenever
the previous stat is 1,
the value of R&S 00 stores
01 reset or compliment.
10 sets, 11. Becomes a 0,
so one becomes 0 so compliment.
What happens when it's already 0?
If it's already 0, the Q is 0 here.
Q Bar is 11 comes here and you
can check this on the disk.
Two stable so now if both or an S is 0.
The internal R and S is also zero stores,
so zero goes to 0.
If S is 0, R is 1. So R is here one,
as is 0 again because the
previous set is 00 goals here 00.
Anna stores. The only change is here.
Again, 0 gold comes here and
one comes here. Now. If S is 1.
Or is 0? So the internal
organ has become zero,
S becomes one, it's set.
So zero becomes one set action.
If both are one.
The same action 10.
And set action internally
so zero becomes one.
So in both cases, in general,
if you merge these two stable,
this is the state that we already had one.
This is the state that we already had zero.
Regardless of the previous state, if.
All in as other spaces.
00 stores 01 reset 10 set,
so you can see that.
Reset. Set.
If you had one. We have one.
If you had zero, we have zero,
so Astors. The only change is here.
If you have one, it becomes 0.
If you have zero, it becomes one.
We can say that the complement.
So that's that's the design
proposed by Jack Kilby,
and because of his name now,
we can call this new Rs latch.
Jay college. The R we rename it to K
and the ask will rename it to jail.
So whenever J is 1K is one we do compliment.
Otherwise it acts like normal artist latch.
And here is the summary of the Jay College.
So we show it like.
They call call goes for RJ codes for
S and this is the characteristic 00
store 01 reset 10711 compliments.
This is the state transition diagram.
If you are at 0, having made the input 11,
it complements.
If you're at one and we do 11,
it compliments.
So there are two ways to go from zero to one,
either set or compliment from one to zero.
Two ways, either reset or compliment.
This is the most competent last we have.
We have four actions,
a story set set an compliment.
So let's do a recap.
These are all four matches we
introduced in this course. Rs.
The store resets at and don't
care the latch, reset and set.
T large store complements.
Jay Collage store reset, set and compliment.
Be careful about the variable names.
This is the stand up all over the world,
so Jake our car represents reset.
J represents set so that's why this is
called set action because Jay is 1K is 0.
This is the reset action case.
One J is there.
Be careful about this naming.
Any questions so far?
So far so good. So I'm going to
introduce a new topic Clock, so again,
I need your feedback just to make
sure that the. Have the focus.
You had 10 minutes left, so I hope I can.
Great how about others?
Timers.
OK, so. Let's continue.
So let's see what is Clock.
You may hear about Clock in, I mean.
In a computer system.
So what is the Clock in digital circuit?
So basically a Clock is a timing device
that generates a train of pulses.
So what is this?
You remember the enable input that I said.
The commander sends the signal to the
latches to open the door or close the door.
That commander is called the Clock.
Actually, the cloud tries to
synchronize all the lattice in a system.
All the latches in the system opens the
door when we have, for instance, one.
All the latches in the system
close the doors when the Clock,
when they enable input is 0.
So this signal comes from a device
called Clock, which is a timing
device that generates this train 1010.
But as you can see here, this timing is very,
I mean regular, so it's not like this.
0000 and then.
100 and then this amount one,
and then this amount one.
So this is not a regular timing.
This timing, which has a I mean.
The same amount 0, and the same amount one.
Is called a pulse,
very like to the heart pulses and the
device that generates this is called Clock.
And the idea is that we can
synchronize all the latches together.
All the latches,
open the door at the same time and
close the doors at the same time.
This way we synchronize all
parts of a sequential system.
That's why we call it a Clock
or a synchronizing device.
All memory units. They for instance.
Again, if you have four latches.
And you want to store information.
All these latches must open the door
together and then close the door together.
As a result, the enable
input goes to all of them.
And who says the enable signal
the Clock device?
In a system, usually disk light
train is generated by the battery,
but for us is we can just
simply call it Clock.
If the lattice work with on the.
When the Clock becomes one,
we call it positive level.
Which is the default.
Sometimes can be called
the largest active high.
So basically these latches that have
enabled and whenever he is one,
they works as normal because
it active high latches.
However, there are some devices that
they based on the negative logic and they
open the door whenever enable input is 0.
So basically the compliment behavior.
We call them negative level or active low
an in order to show that we just put in,
not here.
So whatever,
if the block diagram shows
the enable within not,
it means that that latch becomes
active or opens the door
whenever the enable input is 0.
So if it is zero, it works normal.
If it is one,
it is closing the door and
it keeps whatever it had.
So latches are either active
high or active law by default.
In this course we assume that they
are all the latches are active high.
Whenever enable is 1.
But what is Clock basically Clock?
If we could generate the train of pulses
faster or more of the one or zeros.
It kind of shows the speed
of the system. Why so?
Let's these see these different pulses.
If it divize generate the enable
or zero and ones like this.
As you can see,
within the same amount of time,
it only generates one enable level.
So you can only open the door one time.
So we can store the information
one time within this time period.
However, if you could build a system
that can generate multiple pulses
within the same amount of time,
for instance this one we can create.
2 ones.
So basically you can create two
pulses within the same amount of time.
This shows that your letters
can open the door twice,
and as a result if they are able
to store information twice.
The third train of pulses within
the same amount of time that day
it can generate three pulses.
So basically, if the system has this pulses,
it means that this system can open
the door and close the door three
times within the same amount of time,
and this amount of time usually
calculated based on one second.
So if this amount of time is one second.
The third Clock can generate
three pulses within one second.
As a result, all the latches that
work with this Clock can open and
close the door three times more.
As a result,
they can store information faster.
So this generating the pulses within
one second or the same amount of time,
it's kind of.
Implying is speed up his system.
The metric that shows the number of
pulses within the same amount of time.
For instance, one second is called Hertz.
Which was proposed by. Harish Hertz.
And basically it shows how many pulses
you can generate within one second.
The first Clock, and it only one pulse,
so one pulse within one second one hits.
The second Clock can generate two
pulses within one second, so 2 Hertz.
The third one can generate three pulses,
so free hits, so the number of pulses
within a second is called hits.
So this is the formula.
1 / The number of pulse.
So number of calls within one second is
called hertz. The reverse is called.
You can come up with the time that is
needed to generate only one pulse. So.
One pulse needs one second.
Here one pulse need 1 1/2
and 1 / 2 or half a second.
Here you can generate three
pulses within a second.
How many time you need to
generate one pulse,
so one over third?
Or this amount of 2nd.
This is, I mean, kind of the way
that you can see how many times
you need to change one pulse,
or how many parts you can
generate within one second.
And the heart is the number
of pulses within a second.
If you go to the market and the Intel has
one of these CPU from the Intel company,
if you look at the product you can
see that this product shows 2.9 GHz.
Giga means 1 billion.
It's basically says that this
device can generate 3 billion.
Hertz within one second. As a result,
all the latches inside this device.
Can open or close the door 3
billion times within a second.
And it shows that how fast the transferring
the information within this CPU is.
And if you want wonder what is
the state of the art system?
It is by AMD I believe.
And the company in 2006
that they could generate.
About 30 billion positive within
a second, so this is huge.
I mean I mean speed.
Within a system.
So if you want to transfer
information within this system.
Each pulse you need to open the gate of
the latches and transfer the information.
This device can generate 30 billion policies,
so you can transfer information
within 1 / 30 million.
So you see that how fast the transformation
of the transferring the information is.
Also, if you go to the market and
buy the memory units to store
the information in your system.
It also shows the.
The Clock system of the memory unit,
for instance this one which basically
says that the number of clocks.
Pair second, so in this memory
unit you can generate this
amount of pulse within a second.
And this is the system that you
can assemble so the motherboard,
CPU and memory on it.
Each one has its own pause or Clock.
Or its own speed.
For instance, CP has exports within a second.
Memory has Y pause within a second
and may board. Main board has Z.
Pause within a second.
And what is the final speed?
If you attach the memory to the main
board and CPU to the main board,
what is the speed of transferring
information between CPU to the
memory and memory to the CPU?
I live, you are.
All Tatiana multiplies the hurts,
but The thing is that the number
of false actually is the the.
Ability of that system to
open and close the door.
So basically it says that the memory
can open or close the door of the
latches only Y times per second.
So if you increase it to Y + 1,
they cannot.
Open or close faster.
The CPU also X and member disease.
These are the ability how fast
they can open or close the door,
so we cannot ask them to open
or close the door faster.
So basically the final is still
going to be a minimum of them,
so the minimum of XY&Z.
Usually in the market the speed
of CPU is much faster than
the memory and main board.
As a result, in the CPUs,
so the CPU is at the three
billion giga billion Hertz,
but main board or memory usually works at.
Less speed. Or less pulses within a second.
So usually. The transferring the
information between the memory and CPU
works at the speed of the main Board Z.
Inside each unit they work
based on the internal Clock.
So basically each device has
external Clock and internal Clock.
So whenever a CPU wants to work with the
memory, it works with external Clock,
which is this speed off the main board.
However, whenever the CPU wants to
work inside itself, it uses the
internal Clock so it has two clocks.
You may come out,
you may hear about the over clocking.
Over clocking is the same as Tatiana.
Set less.
Let's ask a system although.
The system says that the CPU works
at X pulses within a second.
We want to ask the CPU whether
it is able to work faster,
which is the concept of over clocking.
Sometimes it can, sometimes it cannot,
so at least it's worth asking.
So this is the concept of over clocking.
Sometimes the main board with CPU
allows you to ask for over clocking
and they may perform faster.
And the next topic is Flip
Flop and we'll explain it.
I mean next lecture but.
This is the idea of Clock and
measuring the speed of assistant.
Basically,
the number of times that you can ask
the memory or sequential circuit.
To look at the input and change their
status is called the the enable
input or the Clock and all of them
are synchronized with this device.
The pulse generation of the Clock system.
The more faster you can generate the Clock,
the more faster your latches can open
and close the door and accept the
change or transfer the information.
OK, we're done. Sorry about the wait.
Next lecture I'm going to introduce
a better type of latches,
which we call them Flip Flop so,
but be careful to work with the RSTD
j k latches because we want to
make it better in the next lecture.
Thank you so much for today's lecture.
Attending to this lecture and take care.
Have a great day.
You're welcome.
Oh, I'm going to be in the office,
so if you have any question
I'm happy to take your question
at the office hour Thank you.